# Open Mainframe Project Mentorship Program - Mentee Guide

- [Role of the Mentor](#role-of-the-mentor)
  * [What Makes a Good Mentor?](#what-makes-a-good-mentor-)
  * [What to Expect from Under-Mentoring](#what-to-expect-from-under-mentoring)
- [Mentorship Program At-A-Glance](#mentorship-program-at-a-glance)
  * [Identifying a project](#identifying-a-project)
  * [Mentee Selection Process](#mentee-selection-process)
  * [Mentee/Mentor Bonding Period](#mentee-mentor-bonding-period)
    + [Goals of the kick-off period:](#goals-of-the-kick-off-period-)
    + [Setting Expectations](#setting-expectations)
    + [Defining Success](#defining-success)
    + [Managing Output](#managing-output)
    + [Workflow](#workflow)
    + [Creating a Strategic Plan](#creating-a-strategic-plan)
  * [Menteeship day-to-day guidelines](#menteeship-day-to-day-guidelines)
    + [Following the Strategic Plan](#following-the-strategic-plan)
    + [Delivering Feedback](#delivering-feedback)
    + [Managing week-to-week progress](#managing-week-to-week-progress)
  * [Midterm Review](#midterm-review)
    + [Final week](#final-week)
  * [Final Review](#final-review)
- [Resources for Mentees/Mentors](#resources-for-mentees-mentors)
  * [GitHub](#github)
  * [Slack](#slack)
  * [Cloud Instance](#cloud-instance)
  * [Further Resources](#further-resources)

Thank you for your willingness to participate as a mentor in the Open
Mainframe Project Mentorship Program. This document is a guide help you
through your role as a mentor.

Much of the inspiration and content for this manual comes from the
[Google Summer of Code
Manual](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/resources/manual),
a big thank you to Google for providing this valuable resource.

Role of the Mentor
==================

Mentors are the key to mentee success. Mentees (the interns) will learn
from you, not only the technical skills needed to complete their
projects, but also the communication, planning, and scoping skills.
These things will give your mentee(s) confidence. Remember, most of the
mentees have never completed a project outside the classroom before, so
while they are technical strong they maybe be looking for your wisdom
and expertise to help guide them through their project during the
mentorship period.

What Makes a Good Mentor?
-------------------------

Mentoring a mentee can be a very rewarding experience. However, being a
good mentor is not just a matter of winding up the mentee and watching
them go. Quality mentoring requires a substantial time commitment and a
willingness and ability to take a leadership role.

There are specific skills that you can work on in order to be more
effective; even experienced mentors can improve.

-   **Work to understand the technology and aspects of the developer
    community.** Mentees are coming new to this and look to you as a
    mentor to help them both understand the focus area they are working
    on and help build their own skills in learning how to navigate
    technology spaces and developer communities. If the technology area
    or community is new to you, you should look to build your own
    support network in the respective space. Having a stable of Subject
    Matter Experts to draw on is always helpful. No one expects you to
    be proficient everything.

-   **Interest in the project\'s success.** If this project area isn\'t
    interesting to you, or if the results of the project are something
    you don\'t see value in, you are less likely to be excited to
    support the mentee and help drive them to success.

-   **Dedicate significant time to the mentee.** Each mentee will have
    varying degrees of experiences and skills, regardless, you should be
    prepared to spend a significant amount of time helping the mentee.
    In a good mentee and mentor relationship, the time commitment will
    likely reduce as the project progresses, but it\'s better to be
    prepared to devote a significant amount of time throughout the
    project

-   **Interest in mentoring mentees.** The overall goal of the program
    is for mentees to be mentored. Mentoring is important to cultivating
    the future of open source software. We do this through mentoring our
    immediate projects and the overall Open Source culture. Remember,
    you are training the next generation of open source developers.
    Mentoring a mentee requires a combination of passion, responsibility
    and patience. A good mentor is willing to engage with mentees
    throughout their learning process.

What to Expect from Under-Mentoring
------------------------------------

-   **A poorly defined project.** The project goals and deliverables are
    unclear, and the work schedule is not set. The consequences of this
    are serious and impact the project if left unchecked.

-   **Lose track of what the mentee is doing.** The state of the project
    is unclear, and its progress is uncertain. Evaluation is impossible
    to do well. The mentee proceeds down the "wrong path" and wastes
    valuable time, gets frustrated and discouraged.

-   **The mentee produces code that isn\'t useful.** The mentee starts
    off on \'the wrong path\', failing to use existing functions or
    established project idioms. Rather than fixing problems as they
    arise they keep on adding more. The code is never integrated into
    the main codebase because it doesn\'t work well enough and would
    require more work to fix than it is worth.

-   **The mentee gets stuck.** The mentee seems to be engaged, and to be
    working hard, but no apparent progress is being made. Alternatively,
    the mentee\'s communications are infrequent and terse, and seem to
    always be on the same issue or milestone. Plan on spending some
    quality time going over details and code reviews.

-   **The mentee disappears, perhaps for days or weeks at a time.** If
    the mentee is under-mentored, it may be difficult to determine when
    this period began, and thus to know when to panic. Insufficient
    information is available for evaluation; thus it becomes impossible
    to fairly evaluate the mentee. The mentee must be reminded that they
    have made a commitment to the mentorship, just as you have as the
    mentor.

Mentorship Program At-A-Glance
==============================

1.  Identifying a project

2.  Mentee Selection Process

3.  Mentee/Mentor Bonding Period -- Project Kick-off

4.  Midterm Evaluation

5.  Final Evaluation

6.  Project Wrap-up

Identifying a project
----------------------

Before the OMP mentorship is opened for mentees to apply, the OMP
mentorship will solicit OMP members to submit project proposals. (The
OMP is also open to non-members proposing projects.) Anyone can submit a
project proposal, however, OMP projects (e.g Ambitus, Atom, ADE,
Feilong, Zorrow, Zowe, etc.) and by OMP project members will be given
priority. To submit a project proposal the project sponsor should fill
out the OMP Mentorship Project Proposal form or submit a one-page
description of the project.

Once project proposals are identified, a mentor is identified for each
of the project proposals, many times the mentor will be the OMP member,
or sponsor, that proposed the project or someone from their
organization. After mentors are chosen and project feasibility has been
determined, the project will be posted and offered to mentee applicants
as a project that they may choose as a project they are interested in
during the OMP mentorship's mentee recruitment phase.

Mentee Selection Process
------------------------

As a mentor, you have expertise in one (or more) of the area(s) of the
project you've been selected. The Linux Foundation's Open Mainframe
project will post your project(s) in the mentee application form for the
summer mentorship applicants. Applicants can choose from a number of
projects offered for the summer mentorship. Based upon some basic
criteria, a set number of applications will be chosen for your project's
final consideration. The mentor of a project may select the mentee
applicants they'd like to put on their short list for their project.

The mentor reviews the list of applicants on his short list for his
project and conducts individual interviews with the mentee applicants.
The purpose of the interviews is to determine the mentee's
qualifications for working on the projects. Such things as skills,
aptitude, commitment, etc. should be reviewed by the mentor. The mentor
then ranks the applicants in the order of preference. A mentor may
select one or more mentees to work on his/her project based upon the
number of mentees needed and/or the number of mentorships available for
the current summer's mentorship program.

Mentee/Mentor Bonding Period
----------------------------

The mentorship program starts with a two-week kick-off or bonding
period, allowing the mentors and mentees a chance to learn how to work
together.

### Goals of the kick-off period:

-   Prepare mentees by introducing them to the resources they will be
    using on the project.

    -   Establish project milestones and expectations.

    -   Identify the Linux Foundation Github repository, how to use
        Github as a code repository.

    -   Identify the Github directory structure:

        -   Which directory to place documentation

        -   Which directory to place source code

        -   Which directory to place notes/research

        -   Which directory to place status reports

        -   How to upload code and comment code

    -   Set up a Slack channel for communication

    -   Identify a cloud instance where they can code, implement, and
        test

        -   Ensure that mentees have a development environment set up.

        -   Ensure mentees get set up with the project version control
            system

        -   Ensure mentees have access to the necessary documentation.

-   Set up a working relationship. Get the mentees engaged socially in
    the project.

    -   Identify a time each week to meet, via conference call or video
        conference

    -   Video conference is preferable so that the mentor and mentee can
        share documents and code in real-time.

    -   Be sure to put the meeting on your calendars so you don't forget

    -   Be sure mentees understand their commitment to the project.

-   Work with the mentee so they can become familiar with the
    development environment. Guide mentees through the environment,
    don't assume they will be able to do it themselves without guidance.

-   Refine the strategic plan for project completion and submit it with
    mentor approval to the Open Mainframe Project Mentorship Program
    Administrator. Set up high-level milestones. This should be the
    beginning of the project design document.

    -   Define the problem to be solved

    -   Define the current state

    -   Identify high level requirements

    -   Define high level timeline

-   Gather and fill out the required forms:

    -   Tax forms required by the Linux Foundation

    -   any contributor license agreements

    -   any paperwork that your project requires

    -   Signed Mentee agreements

Successful completion of your mentee\'s project depends a lot on the
kick-off bonding period. Make sure that you and your mentee make good
use of this time. Make significant progress on preliminary tasks,
setting up expectations and the scope of the project. The mentee/mentor
bonding period is also a good chance for the mentees to start
interacting with each other. Early connections can help the mentees
support each other during design and coding.

Ideally mentees are ready to start the design and code writing at the
official start of coding, and are already engaged socially. During the
mentee/mentor bonding period mentees are expected to learn about the
project they are working on and of the Open Mainframe Project, ensure
they have a development environment setup, get set up with GitHub (with
the appropriate folders) and Slack, read up on necessary documentation,
and further refine the strategic plan and design for successful project
completion.

Plan weekly activities for your mentee that only take an hour or two.
The community bonding period occurs when mentees are likely to still be
taking classes and have a full load of coursework. It\'s unreasonable to
expect that the mentee will be available full-time to work on the
project at this point. Give the mentee assignments to read specific
documentation or do particular activities.

If or any reason, the mentor believes that the mentee candidate is not a
good fit for the mentorship, the Open Mainframe Mentorship Coordinator
should be contacted. Otherwise, the mentee's will receive their 1st
stipend payment at the end of the kick-off period. Mentees should be
engaged and ready to start of coding after they receive the initial
payment. If you don\'t hear anything at all from your accepted mentee
during the mentee/mentor bonding period, or the mentee explicitly drops
out, let us know immediately.

### Setting Expectations

Successful mentors set expectations at the start of their projects. This
includes communication frequency, project goals, availability and ways
of delivering feedback. While the mentor should take the lead in
expectation setting, the process of creating and documenting the
expectations must be collaborative. Mentees and mentors need to agree on
what is expected, or success becomes quite difficult.

### Defining Success

Performance measures make it easier to provide feedback to help your
mentee stay and/or get back on track if s/he veers off-course. Clearly
stated performance measures you make a fair determination on whether or
not a mentee needs to be corrected or even removed from the program.

-   **Get mentee input**: Make sure your mentee has input into the types
    of performance measures used to determine success or failure. It is
    very important that your mentee helps create the performance
    measures to determine project success and failures. Your
    relationship should be a highly collaborative one.

-   **Set achievable goals**: Help your mentee come up with manageable
    project goals. Rather than defining the project as one giant chunk,
    help your mentee break the project goals down into smaller pieces or
    \"inchstones\" that allow a change in direction if necessary. It is
    sad to work the entire summer on one giant deliverable, only find
    out in the last few weeks that the architecture or design is
    defective. Have an overall plan, but use an agile development
    process.

-   **Anticipate time away**: Make sure to set expectations for known or
    planned time away from the project, such as coursework, vacation
    trips or holiday time. Talk about how many hours or deliverables per
    week would be reachable goals and what amount would be a good
    stretch goal.

### Managing Output

Decide in advance what happens when project goals aren\'t met. Remember
to be flexible if your mentee has made good progress or has obviously
worked hard but needs to re-scope the project at mid-term. Good project
management is hard. Your performance measures will help you manage
project modifications.

-   **Plan for Slippage**: Have a plan to deal with scope-creep and
    timeline slippage. What if something happens that prevents your
    mentee from working successfully for an extended period of time? At
    which point do you need to terminate the project? Have a plan in
    place for these scenarios.

-   **Gather Feedback**: Your mentee\'s wishes and desires for a
    successful project are as important as the project goals. Make sure
    that you solicit and incorporate his/her feedback when coming up
    with initial goals, performance measures and communication methods.

Overall, communicate and be reasonable when it comes to your mentees. Be
ready to revise project plans if an unexpected requirement or bug
occurs.

**Pro Tip:** Ask about the weather and local stability of public
services. Is your mentee using the cafe down the street for access to
the internet for accessing his code/Github/documentation? Are there
seasonal weather conditions that may lead to flooding and the subsequent
inability to turn-on one\'s computer? Work on a plan to address these
types of environmental issues that can affect both communication and
output.

**Don\'t Be That Person:** No one likes dictators. Work with your mentee
on the development of expectations, rather than barking out orders. Be a
guide. The program is a learning experience for the mentee.

### Workflow

Make sure that your mentee is familiar with the workflow for the project
as early as possible. Ensuring the mentee is familiar and able to work
with the tools associated with the project, such as libraries, along
with GitHub and Slack. Discussions with your mentee should also
encompass code review, talking with other developers about which
algorithm is best for the problem at hand and other meta-questions about
how to best get from specification to implemented solution.

The best kind of workflows for the mentee projects are iterative. That
means that small, quantifiable goals are defined and then acted upon.
For instance, an example of an iterative workflow is:

-   Write a test that demonstrates what feature will be added.

-   Run the test to verify that it fails in the way you think it should.

-   If it fails in an unexpected way, your test may be wrong. This is a
    great time to ask your mentor for guidance.

-   If it passes, you are done! You just added test coverage to an
    already existing feature, and that is great!

-   Add the feature (also known as \"a simple matter of programming\").

-   Run the test to verify that it passes.

-   Write documentation about your feature.

-   Rejoice appropriately.

This iterative workflow is known as Test Driven Development (TDD). This
workflow gets applied to each feature that will be implemented, so a TDD
workflow will consist of many cycles of the above steps, each for a
different feature. The polar opposite of this workflow looks something
like this:

-   Write design the first 1/3rd of the summer

-   Write code and test the next 1/3rd of the summer

-   Write more tests and document for the last 1/3rd of the summer

This is almost always doomed to failure, since people are always
optimistic about time estimates for completing something. Sometimes you
must debug a weird issue. You can\'t predict how long it might take to
resolve the issue. What usually happens in this workflow is that the
code gets written, but takes longer, half the tests get written and no
documentation is written because the mentees have run out of time.

Take an approach which produces usable code even if parts of your plan
fail, or are never attempted. Be humble and flexible about your
development model. The mentee may teach you something!

**Pro Tip:** Progressive milestones may allow code to be merged
progressively.

### Creating a Strategic Plan

To increase the probability of project's success you should spend time
with your mentee refining the plan developed in the application period.
This should be done during the mentee/mentor bonding period. A good
strategic plan includes:

-   **A high-level design document**: Think about the architecture and
    design of the new feature or enhancements that you are making to
    your community\'s project. Take some time to teach your mentee to
    think about usability by writing a few quick use cases and
    scenarios, and consider the introduction of any new dependencies.

-   **Progressive milestones that build on the previous work:** At the
    completion of each milestone you and your mentee should take the
    opportunity to celebrate the accomplishment and reflect upon it.
    Using progressive milestones also gives you a good measure of how
    far you have come, which can be very useful during periods of
    frustration. Additionally, if you don\'t reach all of the final
    goals of the project, you will have tangible achievements to point
    to when reviewing progress with your mentee. Reinforcement of a
    mentee\'s tangible accomplishments encourages them to stick around
    and helps to create life-time contributors.

-   **Target completion dates for each milestone**: In reality,
    completion dates are going to move. Nonetheless, a target date gives
    you a time frame for closure and helps control \"scope creep\".
    Coach your mentees in how to recognize that a milestone is going to
    be missed, and to notify the project participants before the dates
    passes.

-   **Tasks associated with each milestone**: Because your milestones
    are most likely going to be chunks of of code, each milestone needs
    to include both testing and documentation around that particular
    \"chunk\". This approach helps guarantee that you and your mentee
    don\'t end up with a pile of code that hasn\'t been tested or
    documented at the end of Open Mainframe Project Mentorship Program.

Leveraging the GitHub wiki functionality is the recommended place for
capturing this plan and ensuring everyone has visibility into it.

Menteeship day-to-day guidelines
--------------------------------

After the date on which the mentorship program commences, mentees are
expected to work 40 hours per week on the project (unless this is done
as a class project - in that case consult with the academic institution
instructor for guidance.)

### Following the Strategic Plan

Since you created a strategic plan during the mentee/mentor bonding
phase, you actually need to follow it. Some ways you can use your
strategic plan to stay on track are:

-   **Collect regular status reports**: Status reports are an important
    communication tool. They are also important in making sure that
    time-line slippages and scope creep are addressed in a proactive
    manner. You do not want to find out two weeks after a milestone due
    date that your mentee has slipped the date because they have been
    unable to solve a simple problem. Status reports should be done
    every week (or minimally every 2 weeks.) Status reports do not have
    to be long -- just (1) what the mentee accomplished the last
    week, (2) what the mentee plans to accomplish the next week, and (3)
    what difficulties or issues the mentee is having. It is highly
    encouraged that the mentee document the status plan and file it in
    the GitHub directory.

-   **Check off associated milestone tasks**: Find a way to keep track
    of tasks, and then indicate when they are completed. This can be as
    simple as keeping an informal to-do list in that is referenced in
    weekly status reports. You can also use the project management
    software that the rest of your organization uses. Do what works best
    within your community, but make sure you do something.

-   **Set an expectation of prior notification of missed deadlines**:
    Your mentee is going to miss project deadlines. Make sure that they
    understand that it is important to notify you of the missed deadline
    well in advance. Understanding how long something is going to take
    to complete is a valuable skill, but it is one that is learned
    through ongoing evaluation.

-   **If your mentee misses a deadline, make sure you discuss why**:
    Helping your mentee understand where they become bogged down or
    stuck helps with future strategic plan development. Remember that
    you are cultivating a long-time contributor.

-   **Be a good example**: If you, the mentor, need to miss a deadline,
    make sure you communicate this to your mentee well in advance.

### Delivering Feedback

Throughout the project you should be delivering effective feedback to
your mentee about their code, communication, and documentation.

-   **Deliver feedback early**: Don\'t wait until several issues have
    come up, or until your mentee has impressed you multiple times with
    their efficiency. Let them know right away what you think about
    their work.

-   **Make a point to give positive feedback:** The open source
    community parcels out compliments all too frugally. When a mentee
    completes a task on time, and especially when they exceed your
    expectations, let them know! Early praise is a far better motivator
    than late criticism.

-   **Don\'t avoid critique, but don\'t be a jerk:** Try to put yourself
    in your mentee\'s shoes, and consider how you might want to hear
    constructive criticism. Phrase suggestions positively. If criticism
    is personal in nature (i.e. tone of an email, timeliness or other
    non-code issues), deliver it in private rather than in a public
    forum. When in doubt, ask for advice from more experienced mentors
    or from your organization\'s administrator.

**Pro Tip:** Don\'t let the development of your design document become
your Open Mainframe Project Mentorship Program project. You should have
the strategic plan completed by the end of the mentee/mentor bonding
period (or by the end of midterm) so that you can start coding right
afterwards.

**Don\'t Be That Person:** Don\'t be overly-critical of date slippage.
It happens. Fanatical adherence to dates does not lead to successful
project completion, nor does it make your mentee feel excited to
contribute to your community long-term.

### Managing week-to-week progress

Just like using the GitHub wiki for doing the project strategic plan, a
great practice is to document progress weekly in the GitHub wiki. This
doesn\'t need to be a complex in such a way that creates a burden on the
mentee or the mentor; a simple wiki page with a list of milestones
completed, milestones to be addresses in the next week, and milestones
yet to do is perfect and helps structure the weekly meetings. Here\'s an
example:

Done in the past week

\- Added function X

\- Fixed outstanding issue Y

To do this week

\- Add new feature A

\- Fix regression B

Still outstanding to do

\- New Feature C

\- New Feature D

Midterm Review
--------------

Towards the middle of the mentorship period, the mentor and mentee
should come together and discuss the overall progress of the project and
growth of the mentee. To facilitate this, there will be a standard
system created to capture this feedback, encompassing of

-   Mentee evaluations: Each mentee fills out a mid-term evaluation
    pertaining to their experience and their interaction with mentors.

-   Mentor evaluations: Each mentor fills out a mid-term evaluation
    covering their participation and their mentee\'s performance.

-   Mentee is expected to have a detailed design by mid-term evaluation
    -- a successfully verified detailed design will signal the issuing
    of the mid-term stipend.

Output from this mid-term review will determine both (a) whether the
mentee continues in the program and (b) mid-term payment to the mentee.

There is great guidance and advise for mentor reviews at
[http://write.flossmanuals.net/gsoc-mentoring/evaluations/](http://write.flossmanuals.net/gsoc-mentoring/evaluations/).

### Final week

The final week should be spent cleaning up all loose ends on the
project, such as:

-   Documentation

-   Test suites/cases

-   Presentation on work done

The Open Mainframe Project will coordinate working with mentees with
their presentation development and strategy. As a mentor you should help
your mentee put together their presentation and prepare them to speak on
the project.

Final Review
------------

Once again at the end of the project both the mentor and mentee will
come together after each completes their respective evaluation.

-   Mentee evaluations: Each mentee fills out a final evaluation
    pertaining to their experience and their interaction with mentors.

-   Mentor evaluations: Each mentor fills out a final evaluation
    covering their participation and their mentee\'s performance.

-   Mentee presents his final coded project to mentor. After
    verification of a successfully completed project and the scheduling
    of the conference presentation, the final stipend will be issued to
    the mentee.

Much like the mid-term review, output from the final review will
determine both (a) whether the mentee completed the program successfully
and (b) final payment or credit to the mentee.

Resources for Mentees/Mentors
=============================

The Open Mainframe Project provides the following tools for both project
management and collaboration.

GitHub
------

The [Open Mainframe Project Mentorship Program GitHub
organization](https://github.com/openmainframeproject-internship)
will host all mentee projects. GitHub provides source code management,
issue tracking, and wiki collaboration tools that should be leveraged by
the mentee and mentor during the program.

**Action for Mentor:** When the project is determined, ensure the mentee
works with the Open Mainframe Project Mentorship Program Administrator
to create the repository for the work ( either using an empty repository
for the case of new projects, or a fork of the upstream project for work
on existing projects ). You should provide your GitHub ID to the Open
Mainframe Project Mentorship Program Administrator as well so you can
have the ability to review code easily.

Slack
-----

The Open Mainframe Project has a [Slack
service](https://slack.openmainframeproject.org) for
community communication, and encourages all mentee/mentor communications
to leverage Slack. Slack provide instant messaging, audio/video calling,
and recording of historical conversations.

**Action for mentee and mentor:** Sign up for a [Slack account](https://slack.openmainframeproject.org). The Open
Mainframe Project Mentorship Program Administrator will create a channel
for communications specific to your project.

Cloud Instance
--------------

Students can leverage the [LinuxONE Community Cloud](https://www.openmainframeproject.org/trymainframe)
for a development and testing environment for their projects. These
instances are available at no charge and allow a free instance for use
for up to 120 days.

**Action for mentor**: Sign up for [an account](https://www.openmainframeproject.org/trymainframe)
or help provide your mentee access to a mainframe system for
development.

Further Resources
-----------------

More details on mentor best practices and process are found in the
[Google Summer of Code Mentor Manual](http://write.flossmanuals.net/gsoc-mentoring/about-this-manual/).
This program was inspired by the GSoC program.
